[BEAM-11951] added "Differences from Pandas" page for DataFrame (#15074)
apache/beam: website/www/site/content/en/documentation/dsls/dataframes/differences-from-pandas.md

---
type: languages
title: "Differences from Pandas"
---
<!--
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# Differences from Pandas

> The Apache Beam DataFrame API aims to be a drop-in replacement for Pandas DataFrame, but there are a few differences to be aware of. The Beam DataFrame API is adapted for deferred processing, and Beam doesn’t implement all of the Pandas DataFrame operations.
> 
> This page describes divergences between the Beam and Pandas APIs and provides tips for working with the Beam DataFrame API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Apache Beam DataFrame API aims to be a drop-in replacement for Pandas, but there are a few differences to be aware of. This page describes divergences between the Beam and Pandas APIs and provides tips for working with the Beam DataFrame API.
```

## Working with Pandas sources

Beam operations are always associated with a pipeline. To read source data into a Beam DataFrame, you have to apply the source to a pipeline object. For example, to read input from a CSV file, you could use [read_csv](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.dataframe.io.html#apache_beam.dataframe.io.read_csv) as follows:

    df = p | beam.dataframe.io.read_csv(...)

This is similar to Pandas [read_csv](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.read_csv.html), but `df` is a deferred Beam DataFrame representing the contents of the file. The input filename can be any file pattern understood by [fileio.MatchFiles](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.io.fileio.html#apache_beam.io.fileio.MatchFiles).

For an example of using sources and sinks with the DataFrame API, see [taxiride.py](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/python/apache_beam/examples/dataframe/taxiride.py).

> ## Non-parallelizable operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Classes of Unsupported Operations
### Non-parallelizable operations
```
WDYT about collecting all the classes of operations under a heading like this ("Using interactive Beam" would still be at the same level though)?

To support distributed processing, Beam invokes DataFrame operations on subsets of data in parallel. Some DataFrame operations can’t be parallelized, and these operations raise a [NonParallelOperation](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.dataframe.expressions.html#apache_beam.dataframe.expressions.NonParallelOperation) error by default.

**Workaround**

> If you want to use a non-parallelizable operation, you have to guard it with a `beam.dataframe.allow_non_parallel_operations(True)` block. But note that this collects the entire input dataset on a single node, so there’s a risk of running out of memory. You should only use this workaround if you’re sure that the input is small enough to process on a single worker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to use a non-parallelizable operation, you can guard it with a `beam.dataframe.allow_non_parallel_operations` block, for example:

\```
with beam.dataframe.allow_non_parallel_operations:
   quantiles = df.quantile()
\```

Note that this collects the entire input dataset on a single node, so there’s a risk of running out of memory. You should only use this workaround if you’re sure that the input is small enough to process on a single worker.
```

Might be nice to have a usage example here. (Note my suggestion has an extraneous slash on the code fences, otherwise GitHub renders this incorrectly)

Currently there’s no workaround for this issue. But in the future, Beam Dataframe may support non-deferred column operations on categorical columns. This work is being tracked in [BEAM-12169](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-12169).

## Operations that produce non-deferred values or plots

Because Beam operations are deferred, it’s infeasible to implement DataFrame APIs that produce non-deferred values or plots. If invoked, these operations raise a [WontImplementError](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.dataframe.frame_base.html#apache_beam.dataframe.frame_base.WontImplementError).

**Workaround**

If you’re using [Interactive Beam](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.runners.interactive.interactive_beam.html), you can use `collect` to bring a dataset into local memory and then perform these operations.

> You can also use [to_pcollection](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.dataframe.convert.html#apache_beam.dataframe.convert.to_pcollection) to convert a deferred DataFrame to a PCollection, and you can use [to_dataframe](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.dataframe.convert.html#apache_beam.dataframe.convert.to_dataframe) to convert a PCollection to a deferred DataFrame. These methods provide additional flexibility in working around operations that aren’t implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think this is incorrect (unless I'm misinterpreting?). to_pcollection and to_dataframe aren't helpful here.

## Order-sensitive operations

Beam PCollections are inherently unordered, so Pandas operations that are sensitive to the ordering of rows are not supported. These operations raise a [WontImplementError](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.dataframe.frame_base.html#apache_beam.dataframe.frame_base.WontImplementError).

> Order-sensitive operations may be supported in the future. To track progress on this issue, follow [BEAM-12129](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-12129). You can also [contact us](https://beam.apache.org/community/contact-us/) to let us know we should prioritize this work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Order-sensitive operations may be supported in the future. To track progress on this issue, follow [BEAM-12129](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-12129). If you think we should prioritize this work you can also [contact us](https://beam.apache.org/community/contact-us/) to let us know.
```

## Operations that produce deferred scalars

Some DataFrame operations produce deferred scalars. In Beam, actual computation of the values is deferred, and so  the values are not available for control flow. For example, you can compute a sum with `Series.sum`, but you can’t immediately branch on the result, because the result data is not immediately available. `Series.is_unique` is a similar example. Using a deferred scalar for branching logic or truth tests raises a [TypeError](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/b908f595101ff4f21439f5432514005394163570/sdks/python/apache_beam/dataframe/frame_base.py#L117).

## Operations that aren’t implemented yet

The Beam DataFrame API implements many of the commonly used Pandas DataFrame operations, and we’re actively working to support the remaining operations. But Pandas has a large API, and there are still gaps ([BEAM-9547](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/BEAM-9547)). If you invoke an operation that hasn’t been implemented yet, it will raise a `NotImplementedError`. Please [let us know](https://beam.apache.org/community/contact-us/) if you encounter a missing operation that you think should be prioritized.

> ## Using Interactive Beam to work with deferred or unordered values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using Interactive Beam to access the full pandas API
```

> Some Pandas DataFrame operations can’t be implemented in Beam because they produce deferred values that are incompatible with the Beam programming model. Other operations with deferred results are implemented, but the results aren’t available for control flow in the pipeline. A third class of operations can’t be implemented because they’re order sensitive, and Beam PCollections are unordered. For all these cases, [Interactive Beam](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.runners.interactive.interactive_beam.html) can provide workarounds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I don't know that we need a general explanation here, since these are all explained above.

> Interactive Beam is a module designed for use in interactive notebooks. The module, which by convention is imported as `ib`, provides an `ib.collect` operation that brings a dataset into local memory and makes it available for DataFrame operations that are order-sensitive or can’t be deferred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interactive Beam is a module designed for use in interactive notebooks. The module, which by convention is imported as `ib`, provides an `ib.collect` function that brings a `PCollection` or deferred DataFrrame into local memory as a pandas DataFrame. After using `ib.collect` to materialize a deferred DataFrame you will be able to perform any operation in the pandas API, not just those that are supported in Beam. 
```

> 

Reviewer: Should there be a TODO here with a jira for adding an example?

Author: Good suggestions. Thanks! I integrated your changes, made a few other minor tweaks, and pushed another commit.

## Working with pandas sources

Beam operations are always associated with a pipeline. To read source data into a Beam DataFrame, you have to apply the source to a pipeline object. For example, to read input from a CSV file, you could use [read_csv](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.dataframe.io.html#apache_beam.dataframe.io.read_csv) as follows:

    df = p | beam.dataframe.io.read_csv(...)

This is similar to pandas [read_csv](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.read_csv.html), but `df` is a deferred Beam DataFrame representing the contents of the file. The input filename can be any file pattern understood by [fileio.MatchFiles](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.io.fileio.html#apache_beam.io.fileio.MatchFiles).

For an example of using sources and sinks with the DataFrame API, see [taxiride.py](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/python/apache_beam/examples/dataframe/taxiride.py).

## Classes of unsupported operations

> The sections below describe classes of operations that are not supported, or not yet supported, by Beam DataFrame. Workarounds are suggested, where applicable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sections below describe classes of operations that are not supported, or not yet supported, by the Beam DataFrame API. Workarounds are suggested, where applicable.
```

### Non-parallelizable operations

To support distributed processing, Beam invokes DataFrame operations on subsets of data in parallel. Some DataFrame operations can’t be parallelized, and these operations raise a [NonParallelOperation](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/{{< param release_latest >}}/apache_beam.dataframe.expressions.html#apache_beam.dataframe.expressions.NonParallelOperation) error by default.

**Workaround**

If you want to use a non-parallelizable operation, you can guard it with a `beam.dataframe.allow_non_parallel_operations` block. For example:

>     with beam.dataframe.allow_non_parallel_operations:
>       quantiles = df.quantile()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    from apache_beam import dataframe
    
    with dataframe.allow_non_parallel_operations():
      quantiles = df.quantile()
```
